JOSS Paper (#229)
bpatel2107/pyrokinetics: docs/joss/paper.md

bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

Fusion energy offers the potential for a near limitless source of low carbon energy and is often 
regarded as a solution for the worlds long term energy needs. To realise such a scenario requires
the design of high performance fusion reactors capable of containing the extreme conditions
necessary to enable fusion. Turbulence is typically the dominant source of transport in fusion
plasmas, accounting for the majority of the particle and heat loss. Gyrokinetic modelling aims to 
quantify the level of turbulent transport in fusion reactors and can be used to understand the 
major drivers of turbulence. The realisation of fusion critically depends on understanding how to
mitigate turbulent transport and thus requires high levels of confidence in the tools being
used. Many different gyrokinetic modelling codes are available for use and pyrokinetics aims to 
standardise the analysis of such simulations.

# Statement of need

[Pyrokinetics](https://github.com/pyro-kinetics/pyrokinetics) is a Python project (package: 
[`pyrokinetics`](https://pypi.org/project/pyrokinetics/))
that aims to simplify and standardise gyrokinetic analysis. A wide 

> variety of different gyrokinetic codes exist that utilise different input files and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variety of different gyrokinetic solvers exist that utilise different input file formats and
```

use different normalisations for plasma parameters such as densities, temperatures, velocities,

> and magnetic fields. To gain confidence in the prediction of gyrokinetic codes it is often 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and magnetic fields. To improve confidence in the predictions from gyrokinetic solvers it is often 
```

> desirable to benchmark the results of one code against another. Pyrokinetics aims to ensure that
> all physical plasma parameters given as inputs to gyrokinetic codes are accurate,
> acting as an interface between different codes. Furthermore, gyrokinetics inputs can come from a

Reviewer: I think it's important to clarify that we don't _check_ the inputs, just automagically convert between normalisations etc. Maybe:

```suggestion
desirable to benchmark the results of one code against another. Pyrokinetics aims to make this
easier for researchers by acting as an interface between the different codes, automatically 
handling the conversion of physical input parameters between different normalisations
and file formats. Furthermore, gyrokinetics inputs can come from a
```

> wide variety of modelling tools outside of gyrokinetics. Pyrokinetics interfaces with

Reviewer: Might be good to give a couple of examples of the other tools we can read inputs from?

Author: Do you mean like TRANSP, JETTO, GEQDSK etc.?

Author: I guess I meant to say from codes like TRANSP/JETTO or formats like GEQDSK?

these allowing for the easy generation of both linear and nonlinear gyrokinetic input files and 

> has been built in a modular way such that it is trivial to add in new sources of data. 

Reviewer: Not just modular, but explicitly designed to be extended!

```suggestion
has been designed to be extensible and easy to add new sources of data. 
```

The output of gyrokinetic codes is often multidimensional and each code stores this data in a

> different format with different normalisations. Pyrokinetics will read in all this data and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different format with different normalisations, and potentially across multiple files. Pyrokinetics will seamlessly read in all this data and
```

store it in a single object using an [`xarray`](https://pypi.org/project/xarray/) Dataset, automatically converting the outputs to a 
standard normalisation (using [`pint`](https://pypi.org/project/Pint/)), allowing for direct comparisons between codes. Furthermore, additional derived
outputs such as the linear growth rate of a turbulent instability, can be calculated using the exact
same method such that the modeller is confident that the output is consistent across codes.

Pyrokinetics was designed to be used by gyrokinetics modellers and has already been used in a 
number of scientific publications 
[@giacomin:2023a; @giacomin:2023b; @kennedy:2023]. Furthermore, the 

> interface with python opens up gyrokinetic analysis to the wide variety of python packages available, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
python interface opens up gyrokinetic analysis to the wide variety of python packages available, 
```

allowing for a range of analyses from simple parameter scans to using 
thousands of linear gyrokinetic runs to develop Gaussian process regression models of the
linear properties of electromagnetic turbulence [@hornsby:2023]. Pyrokinetics also maintains 
compatibility with IMAS, a community wide standard for data format [@imbeaux:2015], allowing for 
further interfacing with the whole fusion community and the potential to develop a global gyrokinetic
database.

We hope that pyrokinetics makes gyrokinetics modelling more accessible and will help to increase the
communities confidence in tools available.

# Acknowledgements

> We acknowledge contributions from PlasmaFAIR 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We acknowledge contributions from [PlasmaFAIR](https://plasmafair.github.io), EPSRC Grant EP/V051822/1
```

---
title: 'Pyrokinetics - A python library to standardise gyrokinetic analysis'
tags:
  - Python
  - gyrokinetics
  - turbulence
  - plasma
  - tokamak
  - fusion
authors:
  - name: Bhavin S. Patel
    orcid: 0000-0003-0121-1187
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
  - name: Maurizio Giacomin
    orcid: 0000-0003-2821-2008
    affiliation: 2
  - name: David Dickinson
    orcid: 0000-0002-0868-211X
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Peter Hill
    orcid: 0000-0003-3092-1858
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Author with no affiliation
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Culham Centre for Fusion Energy, Abingdon OX14 3DB, UK
   index: 1
 - name: University of York, Heslington, Y010 5DD, UK 
   index: 2
 - name: Independent Researcher, Country
   index: 3
date: 03 August 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

Fusion energy offers the potential for a near limitless source of low carbon energy and is often 

> regarded as a solution for the worlds long term energy needs. To realise such a scenario requires

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
regarded as a solution for the world's long term energy needs. To realise such a scenario requires
```

> the design of high performance fusion reactors capable of containing the extreme conditions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the design of high performance fusion reactors capable of maintaining the extreme conditions
```

---
title: 'Pyrokinetics - A python library to standardise gyrokinetic analysis'
tags:
  - Python
  - gyrokinetics
  - turbulence
  - plasma
  - tokamak
  - fusion
authors:
  - name: Bhavin S. Patel
    orcid: 0000-0003-0121-1187
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
  - name: Maurizio Giacomin
    orcid: 0000-0003-2821-2008
    affiliation: 2
  - name: David Dickinson
    orcid: 0000-0002-0868-211X
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Peter Hill
    orcid: 0000-0003-3092-1858
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Harry G. Dudding
    orcid: 0000-0002-3413-0861
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Tom F. Neiser
    orcid: 0000-0002-8763-3016
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Culham Centre for Fusion Energy, Abingdon OX14 3DB, UK
   index: 1
 - name: University of York, Heslington, Y010 5DD, UK 
   index: 2
 - name: General Atomics, San Diego, CA 92121, USA
   index: 3
date: 23 August 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

> Fusion energy offers the potential for a near limitless source of low carbon energy and is often 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fusion energy offers the potential for a near limitless source of low-carbon energy and is often 
```

> regarded as a solution for the world's long term energy needs. To realise such a scenario requires

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
regarded as a solution for the world's long-term energy needs. To realise such a scenario requires
```

> the design of high performance fusion reactors capable of maintaining the extreme conditions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the design of high-performance fusion reactors capable of maintaining the extreme conditions
```

> necessary to enable fusion. Turbulence is typically the dominant source of transport in fusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
necessary to enable fusion. Turbulence is typically the dominant source of transport in magnetically-confined fusion
```

> plasmas, accounting for the majority of the particle and heat loss. Gyrokinetic modelling aims to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
plasmas, accounting for the majority of the particle and heat losses. Gyrokinetic modelling aims to 
```

> quantify the level of turbulent transport in fusion reactors and can be used to understand the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quantify the level of turbulent transport encountered/expected/observed in fusion reactors and can be used to understand the 
```

Author: Encountered seems best here

major drivers of turbulence. The realisation of fusion critically depends on understanding how to

> mitigate turbulent transport and thus requires high levels of confidence in the tools being

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mitigate turbulent transport, and thus requires high levels of confidence in the predictive tools being
```

> used. Many different gyrokinetic modelling codes are available for use and pyrokinetics aims to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
employed. Many different gyrokinetic modelling codes are available and pyrokinetics aims to 
```

standardise the analysis of such simulations.

# Statement of need

[Pyrokinetics](https://github.com/pyro-kinetics/pyrokinetics) is a Python project (package: 
[`pyrokinetics`](https://pypi.org/project/pyrokinetics/))
that aims to simplify and standardise gyrokinetic analysis. A wide 

> variety of different gyrokinetic solvers exist that utilise different input file formats and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variety of gyrokinetic solvers exist that utilise different input file formats and
```

> use different normalisations for plasma parameters such as densities, temperatures, velocities,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
normalisations for plasma parameters such as densities, temperatures, velocities,
```

and magnetic fields. To improve confidence in the predictions from gyrokinetic solvers it is often 
desirable to benchmark the results of one code against another. Pyrokinetics aims to make this
easier for researchers by acting as an interface between the different codes, automatically 
handling the conversion of physical input parameters between different normalisations
and file formats. Furthermore, gyrokinetics inputs can come from a

> wide variety of modelling tools outside of gyrokinetics. Pyrokinetics interfaces with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wide variety of modelling tools outside of gyrokinetics, such as X, Y and Z. Pyrokinetics also interfaces with
```

> these allowing for the easy generation of both linear and nonlinear gyrokinetic input files and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these tools, allowing for the easy generation of both linear and nonlinear gyrokinetic input files, and 
```

> has been designed to be extensible and easy to add new sources of data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has been designed to be extensible and simple to incorporate new sources of data. 
```

The output of gyrokinetic codes is often multidimensional and each code stores this data in a

> different format with different normalisations, and potentially across multiple files. Pyrokinetics will seamlessly read in all this data and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different format with different normalisations, potentially across multiple files. Pyrokinetics seamlessly reads in all of this data and
```

> store it in a single object using an [`xarray`](https://pypi.org/project/xarray/) Dataset, automatically converting the outputs to a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stores it in a single object using an [`xarray`](https://pypi.org/project/xarray/) Dataset, automatically converting the outputs to a 
```

standard normalisation (using [`pint`](https://pypi.org/project/Pint/)), allowing for direct comparisons between codes. Furthermore, additional derived

> outputs such as the linear growth rate of a turbulent instability, can be calculated using the exact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
outputs such as the linear growth rate of a turbulent instability can be calculated using the exact
```

> same method such that the modeller is confident that the output is consistent across codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
same method, such that the modeller can be confident that the output is consistent across codes.
```

> Pyrokinetics was designed to be used by gyrokinetics modellers and has already been used in a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pyrokinetics is designed to be used by gyrokinetics modellers and has already been used in several
```

> number of scientific publications 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scientific publications 
```

[@giacomin:2023a; @giacomin:2023b; @kennedy:2023]. Furthermore, the 
python interface opens up gyrokinetic analysis to the wide variety of python packages available, 

> allowing for a range of analyses from simple parameter scans to using 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allowing for a range of analyses from simple parameter scans to the use of
```

thousands of linear gyrokinetic runs to develop Gaussian process regression models of the
linear properties of electromagnetic turbulence [@hornsby:2023]. Pyrokinetics also maintains 

> compatibility with IMAS, a community wide standard for data format [@imbeaux:2015], allowing for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
compatibility with IMAS, a community-wide standard for data formatting [@imbeaux:2015], allowing for 
```

further interfacing with the whole fusion community and the potential to develop a global gyrokinetic
database.

> We hope that pyrokinetics makes gyrokinetics modelling more accessible and will help to increase the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With pyrokinetics we strive to make gyrokinetic modelling more accessible and to increase the
```

> communities confidence in tools available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
community's confidence in the tools available.
```

major drivers of turbulence. The realisation of fusion critically depends on understanding how to
mitigate turbulent transport, and thus requires high levels of confidence in the predictive tools being
employed. Many different gyrokinetic modelling codes are available and Pyrokinetics aims to

> standardise the analysis of such computationally demanding simulations.

Author: Not always true. Pyro works with TGLF and there's no reason you can't run low cost simulations like GA-STD/CBC which don't need to be very expensive, especially when linear

Reviewer 3: Agreed - was trying to emphasize that standardization / accurate inputs/conversions is especially important given runs are particularly challenging!

Reviewer 3: Would it be good to change https://github.com/pyro-kinetics/pyrokinetics/blob/038eb7aee01ce05e5b2fa74334048dc74f2ab57e/README.md?plain=1#L180 to something like Used and Developed by to capture the institutions of all the contributing author?

Author: Happy to add institutions but for all the authors we have the citation file
